

            Speech Signal Processing Toolkit (SPTK)
              version 3.1 release October 1, 2007

The Speech Signal Processing Toolkit (SPTK) is a suite of speech
signal processing tools for UNIX environments, e.g., LPC
analysis, PARCOR analysis, LSP analysis, PARCOR synthesis
filter, LSP synthesis filter, vector quantization techniques,
and other extended versions of them.

SPTK was developed and has been used in the research group of
Prof. Satoshi Imai (he has retired) and Prof. Takao Kobayashi
(currently he is with Interdisciplinary Graduate School of
Science and Engineering, Tokyo Institute of Technology) at P&I
laboratory, Tokyo Institute of Technology.  A sub-set of tools
is chosen and arranged for distribution by Prof. Keiichi Tokuda
(currently he is with Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Nagoya Institute of Technology) as a coordinator in
cooperation with Dr. Takashi Masuko (currently he is with
Corporate Research & Development Center, Toshiba Corp.),
Dr. Kazuhito Koishida (currently he is with Microsoft Research),
Dr. Shinji Sako (currently he is a Research Asociate, Nagoya
Institute of Technology), Dr, Heiga Zen (currently he is a
PostDoc fellow at Nagoya Institute of Technology), and some
graduate students.

The original source codes have been written by many people who
took part in activities of the research group.  The most
original source codes of this distribution were written by Takao
Kobayashi (graph, data processing, FFT, sampling rate
conversion, etc.), Keiichi Tokuda (speech analysis, speech
synthesis, etc.), and Kazuhito Koishida (LSP, vector
quantization, etc.).

This version is accompanied by a Reference Manual. A small
User's Manual "Examples for using SPTK" is also attached.

****************************************************************
                           What's new
****************************************************************

The differences between version 3.0 and 3.1:

 - change from K&R to ANSI C.

 - bug fixes

 - add several commands

 - release a Reference Manual written in English, and abandon
   Japanese manuals and web pages

Please see ChangeLog included in the release for details.

****************************************************************
                            Copying
****************************************************************

The Speech Signal Processing Toolkit (SPTK) version 3.1 is
released under a BSD type license which is a permissive free
software license.  However, although the code is free, we still
offer no warranties and no maintenance.  We will continue to
endeavor to fix bugs and answer queries when can, but are not in
a position to guarantee it.  We will consider maintenance
contracts and consultancy if desired, please contacts us for
details.

The current copyright on the toolkit is

----------------------------------------------------------------
      Speech Signal Processing Toolkit (SPTK): version 3.1
                       SPTK Working Group

                 Department of Computer Science
                 Nagoya Institute of Technology
                              and
  Interdisciplinary Graduate School of Science and Engineering
                 Tokyo Institute of Technology
                    Copyright (c) 1984-2007
                      All Rights Reserved.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to use and
distribute this software and its documentation without
restriction, including without limitation the rights to use,
copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or
sell copies of this work, and to permit persons to whom this
work is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

 1. The code must retain the above copyright notice, this list
    of conditions and the following disclaimer.

 2. Any modifications must be clearly marked as such.

 3. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above
    copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following
    disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials
    provided with the distribution.  Otherwise, one must contact
    the HTS working group.

NAGOYA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY, TOKYO INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY,
SPTK WORKING GROUP, AND THE CONTRIBUTORS TO THIS WORK DISCLAIM
ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING ALL
IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS, IN NO EVENT
SHALL NAGOYA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY, TOKYO INSTITUTE OF
TECHNOLOGY, SPTK WORKING GROUP, NOR THE CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
FOR ANY SPECIAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY
DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS,
WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTUOUS
ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR
PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
----------------------------------------------------------------

****************************************************************
                          Environment
****************************************************************

We expect that all programs can be compiled and can work on most
of UNIX-type operation systems.

Note that some commands need C-shell (/bin/csh) since they are
implemented by C-shell scripts.

****************************************************************
                          Installation
****************************************************************

0) Enter 'src' directory.

1) Type

       % ./configure --help

  and read the help messages.

2) To build and install all tools, type:

       % ./configure --prefix=/usr/local/SPTK
       % make
       % make install

The X-window library is not required for compilation of all tools
except a command 'xgr' since only 'xgr' uses the X-window library.

****************************************************************
                             Notice
****************************************************************

As the version advances, specifications for the Speech Signal
Processing Toolkit will be changed without notifications.

****************************************************************
                           Bug report
****************************************************************

Bug reports, comments, questions for the Speech Signal
Processing Toolkit are very welcome.  Please send them to

  dsp-cmnd@sp.nitech.ac.jp

by email. We will reply to any questions as much as possible but
we cannot assure that we will reply to all messages.

Please see

  http://sp-tk.sourceforge.net/

for more information about the Speech Signal Processing Toolkit
(e.g., "Examples for using Speech Signal Processing Toolkit").

****************************************************************
                             Notes
****************************************************************

Generic properties of each command are summarized as follows:

  i) Data has float-type format, i.e., single-precision floating
     point format.  This can be changed to double-type format by
     specifying a compile option.

 ii) Data files do not have headers nor any structures, i.e.,
     they are flat row files.

iii) Basically they manipulate data through standard input and
     standard output.

 iv) To display (error) messages they use standard error output
     rather than standard output.

  v) They do not request interactive key inputs.

 vi) Options are specified on the command line.

****************************************************************
                        Acknowledgments
****************************************************************

The following people have contributed to the development of SPTK
in various ways.  It is their work that makes it all possible.
In no special order:

Takao Kobayashi
Keiichi Tokuda
Takashi Masuko
Chiyomi Miyajima
Masatsune Tamura
Takayoshi Yoshimura
Shinji Sako
Yoshihiko Nankaku
Toshihiko Kato
Gou Hirabayashi
Naohiro Isshiki
Noboru Miyazaki
Toshio Kanno
Kenji Chiba
Toshiaki Fukada
Satoshi Imai
Tadashi Kitamura
Heiga Zen

and others.

****************************************************************
                           Who we are
****************************************************************

SPTK working group is a voluntary group for developing the
Speech Signal Processing Toolkit.  Current SPTK working group
members are

 Keiichi Tokuda (Coordinator) http://www.sp.nitech.ac.jp/~tokuda/
 Takashi Masuko
 Shinji Sako                  http://www.mmsp.nitech.ac.jp/~sako/
 Yoshihiko Nankaku            http://www.sp.nitech.ac.jp/~nankaku/
 Heiga Zen                    http://www.sp.nitech.ac.jp/~zen/
 Junichi Yamagishi            http://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/jyamagis/

and the members are dynamically changing.  The current formal
contact address of SPTK working group is
dsp-cmnd@sp.nitech.ac.jp.
****************************************************************
