

            Speech Signal Processing Toolkit (SPTK)
              version 3.1 release October 1, 2007

The Speech Signal Processing Toolkit (SPTK) is a suite of speech
signal processing tools for UNIX environments, e.g., LPC
analysis, PARCOR analysis, LSP analysis, PARCOR synthesis
filter, LSP synthesis filter, vector quantization techniques,
and other extended versions of them.

SPTK was developed and has been used in the research group of
Prof. Satoshi Imai (he has retired) and Prof. Takao Kobayashi
(currently he is with Interdisciplinary Graduate School of
Science and Engineering, Tokyo Institute of Technology) at P&I
laboratory, Tokyo Institute of Technology.  A sub-set of tools
is chosen and arranged for distribution by Prof. Keiichi Tokuda
(currently he is with Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Nagoya Institute of Technology) as a coordinator in
cooperation with Dr. Takashi Masuko (currently he is with
Corporate Research & Development Center, Toshiba Corp.),
Dr. Kazuhito Koishida (currently he is with Microsoft Research),
Dr. Shinji Sako (currently he is a Research Associate, Nagoya
Institute of Technology), Dr, Heiga Zen (currently he is a
PostDoc fellow at Nagoya Institute of Technology), and some
graduate students.

The original source codes have been written by many people who
took part in activities of the research group.  The most
original source codes of this distribution were written by Takao
Kobayashi (graph, data processing, FFT, sampling rate
conversion, etc.), Keiichi Tokuda (speech analysis, speech
synthesis, etc.), and Kazuhito Koishida (LSP, vector
quantization, etc.).

This version is accompanied by a Reference Manual. A small
User's Manual "Examples for using SPTK" is also attached.

****************************************************************
                           What's new
****************************************************************

The differences between version 3.0 and 3.1:

 - change from K&R to ANSI C.

 - bug fixes

 - add several commands

 - release a Reference Manual written in English, and abandon
   Japanese manuals and web pages

Please see ChangeLog included in the release for details.

